mr. Bamford could you give us your
perspective and your assessment on both
of these programs that we've been
talking about first of all the prison
program and then the data that was
collected from verizon well I think it's
extraordinary the amount of reach that
the NSA has has taken over the last few
years I mean to this is an agency that
was designed originally to spy only
outside the United States is by on
foreign governments and not to spy on US
citizens and here the program allows NSA
to get access it looks like virtually
unlimited access to the major internet
providers Google Yahoo Microsoft
Facebook and so forth in the US what's
different about these programs than ones
we simile heard about during the Bush
administration well the Bush
administration the it seemed like it was
far more limited than what we see here
first of all in the bush administration
there were really no allegations that
they were focusing on purely domestic
communications and the program involving
the telecom company sir Verizon and so
forth involves not only domestic
communications but local communications
in other words if you're calling a
next-door neighbor so there was never
this this far reach in the bush
administration although that program
itself was was quite extensive what
happened though was that after the Bush
administration warrantless eavesdropping
program was codenamed stellar wind after
that was revealed by the New York Times
the Congress basically just allowed that
program to continue under the rubric of
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Amendment X so it basically codified
into law the activities of the bush
warrantless eavesdropping program and
then they've been expanded on by the
Obama administration we heard Senator
Dianne Feinstein and others talk about
their knowledge of the program but also
for the fact that since courts are
involved in the gathering of this
information that it shouldn't be an
alarm to to average citizens well I
think that's such a misnomer in terms of
describing the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court then it was
originally set up it was a very powerful
court that the exercise jurisdiction
over who was being used dropped on I was
back in nineteen seventy eight Mets how
it worked from 1978 until 2001 and then
that's when the bush administration went
around a secretly went around the court
and then after that was discovered what
Congress did was basically neuters
accorded it took away a lot of its
enforcement powers it basically made it
a rubber stamp I'm turn the FISA Court
into a rubber stamp so by saying that
don't worry the FISA courts you know
overseeing our operations is really
nonsense when it comes to the type of
data that's gathered is the term
metadata and the way it's described with
its just win the call was placed how
long etc is it is innocuous as its
projected by even verizon and something
talk about the program well the metadata
is all the externals from the telephone
call except for the conversations where
a call was made from which call which
number is calling which other number the
frequency of the calling all that
information is just bland information
everyone really mean much for what
Beyonce does both NSA's job basically is
to get of mine all that information
always take it and turn it into
something meaningful so it's when you
start analyzing all that information
that you start sort of value adding it
and and and that's what we start getting
into issues of privacy and so forth you
know people in the US or we're supposed
to have some degree of privacy with
their communications if I call my next
door neighbor I wouldn't expect that the
end
they would have a reason to have a
record of that for how long I spoke or
how often I spoke her who I called after
that I mean why are these shirts made
that these agencies have this power to
do this type of surveillance John putt
horse and the New York Post has an op-ed
on this issue and some of the arguments
he makes is saying let's get this
straight verizon has 120 million
customers 120 million whatever it is the
NSA is searching for it isn't the use of
a phone sex line or your jokes about
Barack Obama your gambling problem or
anything anything about you dear reader
the thing is no matter how important you
are you to yourself you're exactly that
unimportant for the computers at the
National Security Agency how would you
respond to that well I'd never known
John the pot horse yes of course to be
an expert on the NSA I haven't seen the
ratings in the NSA lately so I think
that's just a bad analysis of what the
US dance for the US and stand for
massive surveillance that's what George
Orwell wrote about in 1984 where you
have a surveillance society and
everything is the government has access
to everything it's absurd to think that
the this is a great deterrent to
terrorism I mean why didn't they prevent
the Boston bombings which is such a
great program how about the underwear
bomber times square bomber the US has
had a really bad record in terms of
preventing these terrorist incidents and
it's one reason is because they have too
much information not too little
information I mean figure you build the
haystack the more difficult it is to
find the needle and all they keep doing
is building the hastag bigger and bigger
and instead of hiring people to put more
hey on the stack they should be hiring
more analysts to analyze what the in the
stack instead of just acquiring more and
more information and that's that what I
got from me
article about the prison is that they
keep lying you know that nine of the
major companies now we need more we're
trying to get more companies information
from more companies and you know if it's
so great with why did the or what are
these bombings or keep happening all
I've heard is it it may have been some
terrorist incident that was prevented
that they don't give any details of
world one of them one of the statements
from the White House James Bamford was
that the president was open to a
discussion about the this type of
activity the gathering of information
versus concerns about national security
and privacy do you think these
revelations of stories will open on a
dialogue on Capitol Hill about where we
are as far as privacy is concern that
the plumbing hell on Capitol Hill is
that all these commerce people senators
and Congress members of Congress want to
play it safe so after nine eleven people
they know that there is no value in
inciting the civil liberties so because
you know when you go up for reelection
your opponent is going to say unless you
voted for you know some heavy-handed
legislation involving surveillance or
whatever that you're weak on terrorism
and nobody wants to be accused of being
weak on terrorism so you get very little
support in Congress for moderation or
for lowering the bar when it comes to
all the surveillance and so I don't
expect too much to come out of Congress
I haven't expected anything out of
Congress for years if not decades one
more question James Bamford as far as
after the information is taken and
what's done with it there's a picture in
one of the papers this morning that
shows something called the NSA's Utah
data center in Bluffdale Utah is that
where the information is stored once
it's gathered or to other places so I
actually wrote the cover story on that
on the NSA data story storage in the
Bluffdale Utah live it there is a cover
story on that program for Wired magazine
last year it's a million-square-foot
data center and that will
do the central location where all the
information that as a picks up whether
it's by satellite or from Inglis prison
collection or from the call details from
the verizon and so forth and all the
information they pick up surveilling the
Middle East Libya Afghanistan suppose
they all go to this one location this 1
million-square-foot data center in
bluffdale utah and that will serve as
the NSA's cloud in other words from that
or to that location the NSA analysts at
headquarters and other places will be
able to access all the data that's
sitting in there too heavily secured
fiber optic cables so it serves as the
central repository for NSA's
surveillance capabilities and the point
where the analysts dipped in to come out
of electronically to analyze the
information james bamford national
security writer a long time writer about
these kind of issues also an author as
well and writes for several publications
joining us to give his perspective mr.
Bamford thanks for your time